Many algorithms, particularly divide and conquer algorithms such as
binary search, quick sort, merge sort have their time
complexities in
recurrence relations
So writing recurrence relation and learning how to solve it
is very important in time complexity analysis
Now let us quickly discuss what is a recurrence relation
A recurrence relation is an equation that is defined in
terms of itself
For example the factorial is defined by the recurrence
relations fact(n) = n*fact(n-1)
where n is greater than 0
and the initial condition is zero factorial equal to
one
And the Fibonacci sequence is defined using their recurrence
fib(n) = fib(n-1) +
fib(n-2) with initial conditions
fib(0)=0 and
fib(1)=1
Here we can notice that these equations are defined in
terms of themselves
Hence they are called recurrence relations
So we have learned what is a recurrence relation
And now let us learn how to write a recurrence
relations
Let us take this sample
recursive algorithm
Here let us assume that this algorithm takes T(n)
time so let us
mark this as T(n)
Now let's go inside the algorithm and write the time
taken by each line of code
First the condition is checked
It will take one unit of time
So write one here inside that the printing statement is
there
It will also take one unit of time
So write one here also
And the next one is a recursivee call
We already wote the algorithm of n takes
T(n)
Then how much time this algorithm of (n-1)
will take It is T(n-1) time
so write T(n-1)  here and that's it
Let us calculate the total time taken by T(n)
is T(n-1) + 1 +1
So T(n) = T(n-1) + 2
Here the number two is a constant so we can
assume it as 1, As both are asymptotically same
here instead of 1,
We can also write some constant notation like c, k
etcetera
For better understanding we will express Constant as 1 in our
videos
So in the recurrence relation if we have constant values
It can be anything like 2, 100, 1000
etcetara...
We can always assume it as 1
So the total time taken by T(n)=
T(n-1) + 1
Now let us wite the
the recurrence with initial condition T(n) is
T(n-1) + 1 when n is greater than
zero And what will happen when n is equal to zero
the programme execution wont even enter inside the if condition
simply This algorithm will not do anything when n is equal
to zero
So we can say that T(n)   will take constant time
when n is equal to zero. We will always express constant
as 1 So we can write T(n) as 1
when n=0. This is the recurrence relation of
this algorithm and this is how we write recurrence relation
for any algorithm We will see more examples in the
coming lessons and that's all for this video and in
this video we have learned what is a reccurrence relation
and how to write a recurrence relation
In the next video we will learn how to soar